1
PRINCIPLES FOR TRACEABILITY/PRODUCT TRACING AS A
TOOL WITHIN A FOOD INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION
SYSTEM
CAC/GL 60-2006
SECTION 1 – SCOPE
1. This document elaborates a set of principles to assist competent authorities in
utilising traceability/product tracing as a tool within their food inspection and certification
system. This document should be read in conjunction with all relevant Codex texts as
well as those adopted by IPPC and OIE where appropriate.
2. Recognizing the dual mandate of the Codex Alimentarius, traceability/product tracing
is a tool that may be applied, when and as appropriate, within a food inspection and
certification system in order to contribute to the protection of consumers against food-
borne hazards and deceptive marketing practices and the facilitation of trade on the
basis of accurate product description.1
SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS
Inspection2: is the examination of food or systems for control of food, raw materials,
processing and distribution, including in-process and finished product testing, in
order to verify that they conform to requirements.
Certification2: is the procedure by which official certification bodies and officially
recognized bodies provide written or equivalent assurance that foods or food control
systems conform to requirements. Certification of food may be, as appropriate,
based on a range of inspection activities which may include continuous on-line
inspection, auditing of quality assurance systems, and examination of finished
products.
Equivalence3: is the capability of different inspection and certification systems to
meet the same objectives.
Traceability/product tracing4: the ability to follow the movement of a food through
specified stage(s) of production, processing and distribution.
1 Codex Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20 – 1995).
2 Codex Principles for Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification (CAC/GL 20 – 1995).
3 Codex Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export
Inspection and Certification Systems. (CAC/GL 26 – 1997).
4 Codex Procedural Manual.
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (5th Edition)
2
SECTION 3 – PRINCIPLES
3. These principles cover the context, rationale, design and application of
traceability/product tracing as a tool for use by a competent authority within a food
inspection and certification system.
Context
4. Traceability/product tracing, as defined above, is one of a number of tools that may
be utilised by a competent authority within its food inspection and certification system.
5. An importing country should consider that a food inspection and certification system
without a traceability/product tracing tool may meet the same objective and produce the
same outcomes (e.g. regarding food safety, provide the same level of protection) as a
food inspection and certification system with traceability/product tracing5.
6. It should not be mandatory for an exporting country to replicate (i.e. establish the
same) the traceability/product tracing tool as used by the importing country, when
applicable.
Rationale
7. The application of a traceability/product tracing tool by a competent authority should
improve the effectiveness and/or efficiency of the actions that may be necessary
regarding its measures or requirements within its food inspection and certification
system.
8. Traceability/product tracing is a tool that when applied in a food safety context does
not in itself improve food safety outcomes unless it is combined with appropriate
measures and requirements. It can contribute to the effectiveness and/or efficiency of
associated food safety measures6.
9. Traceability/product tracing is a tool that when applied in a food inspection and
certification system can contribute to the protection of consumers against deceptive
5 Codex Guidelines for the Development of Equivalence Agreements Regarding Food Import and
Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL 34-1999); Codex Guidelines on the Judgement of
Equivalence of Sanitary Measures Associated with Food Inspection and Certification Systems (CAC/GL
53-2003).
6 For example, by providing information on suppliers or customers involved in potential food safety
issues so enabling targeted product recall/withdrawal.
PRINCIPLES FOR TRACEABILITY/PRODUCT TRACING AS A TOOL WITHIN
A FOOD INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEM (CAC/GL 60-2006)
3
marketing practices and facilitation of trade on the basis of accurate product
description7.
10. In every case a traceability/product tracing tool should be justified within the context
of the food inspection and certification system and the purpose, objectives and
specifications of the traceability/product tracing tool clearly described. The scope and
extent of application of the tool should also be consistent with the described need.
Design
11. The traceability/product tracing tool may apply to all or specified stages of the food
chain (from production8 to distribution), as appropriate to the objectives of the food
inspection and certification system.
12. The traceability/product tracing tool should be able to identify at any specified stage
of the food chain (from production to distribution) from where the food came (one step
back) and to where the food went (one step forward), as appropriate to the objectives
of the food inspection and certification system.
13. The objectives, scope and related procedures of a food inspection and certification
system that includes a traceability/product tracing tool should be transparent and made
available to competent authorities of the exporting country upon request.
Application
14. The application of traceability/product tracing should take into account the
capabilities of developing countries.
15. If in the context of a traceability/product tracing tool an importing country has
objectives or outcomes of their food inspection and certification system which cannot
be met by an exporting country, the importing country should consider the provision of
assistance to the exporting country, and especially in the case of a developing country.
Assistance may include longer time frames for implementation, flexibility of design and
technical assistance, so that the objectives or outcomes of the food inspection and
certification system of the importing country can be met.
7 For example, by reinforcing confidence in the authenticity of the product and the accuracy of
information provided on the products (e.g. country of origin, organic farming, religious concerns such
as kosher or halal).
8 Production could be interpreted in such a broad manner as to cover food producing animals, feed,
fertilizers, pesticides, veterinary drugs and any input of plant or animal origin, etc. if relevant for
specific applications of traceability/product tracing to food.
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS (5th Edition)
4
16. A food inspection and certification system within which a traceability/product tracing
tool is applied should not be more trade restrictive than necessary.
17. The application of the traceability/product tracing tool should be practical,
technically feasible and economically viable within a food inspection and certification
system.
18. In deciding whether and how to apply the traceability/product tracing tool, in the
context of a food inspection and certification system the competent authority should
take account of the assessed food safety risks and/or the characteristics of the potential
deceptive marketing practices being addressed.
19. Traceability/product tracing tool within the context of a food inspection and
certification system should be implemented when and as appropriate on a case by
case basis.
