Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | October 2023 0 of 24
FSSC 22000
Version 1 | September 2023
GUIDANCE DOCUMENT: FOOD LOSS AND
WASTE
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 1 of 24
CONTENTS
REVISION HISTORY...........................................................................................................................1
1. PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................................2
2. INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................2
3. SCOPE .........................................................................................................................................3
4. FSSC 22000 SCHEME REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................4
5. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTATION.........................................................................................4
6. GUIDANCE FOR AUDITORS .......................................................................................................9
7. REFERENCES...............................................................................................................................9
8. RELATED INDUSTRY INFORMATION......................................................................................10
APPENDIX A ..................................................................................................................................111
REVISION HISTORY
Date Published Issue Changes
September 2023 1 First publication
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 2 of 24
1. PURPOSE
Guidance Document for organizations on how to implement the FSSC 22000 requirements on food
loss and waste within their food safety management systems. Whilst reference is made on how to
implement food loss and waste reduction, this is informative only and designed to assist
organizations based on existing information available.
2. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
The United Nations General Assembly adopted a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
with SDG 12 looking to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns. SDG 12.3 calls
for halving per capita global food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reducing food losses
along production and supply chains (including postharvest losses) by 2030.
The mission of FSSC is to provide trust and deliver impact to the consumer goods industry. Our
goal is to help organizations contribute to the global SDGs and create a better world. The addition
of food loss and waste as an additional requirement into the FSSC 22000 Scheme supports this
goal and aims to support organizations in their contributions to meeting the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
According to the Champions 12.3 2022 Progress Report1 on SDG 12.3, approximately 8% of all food
produced in the world is lost at farm level; 14% is lost between the farm gate and the retail sector,
e.g., manufacturers and producers; and 17% is wasted at the retail, food service, and household
levels of the food supply chain. This results in significant impacts on human livelihoods and well-
being, the global economy, and the environment. Over the past few years, events such as war and
the COVID-19 pandemic have exacerbated food loss and waste by continually disrupting the
human food supply chain. In addition, ISO has assembled a working group for the purposes of
“standardization of food loss and waste, providing a framework for food organizations throughout
the food chain, to work actively and effectively with measuring and reduction of food loss and
waste” (ISO 2021).
This progress report1 gives rise to further considerations on how food loss and waste affect us all:
• Food security: Nearly 1 in 10 people are undernourished (FAO 2018), whilst more than 2
billion tons of food each year never gets consumed (WWF-UK 2021).
• Economic costs: Food loss and waste result in more than US$1 trillion in economic losses
globally per year (Scialabba 2015; WWF-UK 2021).
• The environment: The production of food that is ultimately lost or wasted requires a land
area greater than that of China (FAO 2013). Food loss and waste generate about 8–10% of
global greenhouse gas emissions annually (IPCC 2020). To put this in perspective, if food
loss and waste were a country, it would be the third-largest greenhouse gas emitter on the
planet—surpassed only by China and the United States. In fact, reducing food loss and
waste by half would avoid 1.5 gigatons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per year by
2050, an amount greater than the current energy-related and industry-related emissions
of Japan (Searchinger et al. 2019).
Reducing food loss and waste, therefore, can save money for farmers, companies, and
households; feed more people by wasting less; and reduce the burden on water, land, and the
climate2.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 3 of 24
Figure 1 below is the food waste pyramid developed by the UN's Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) which outlines the most preferable solutions to address food loss and waste.
The ideal solution is prevention and reduction, followed by repurposing and recycling, and lastly,
recovery and disposal.
Figure 1: Food waste pyramid3
3. SCOPE
This FSSC 22000 Guidance document is meant as a guideline for the food industry to provide
practical information and guidance on implementing FSSC Additional Requirement 2.5.16 Food
Loss and Waste for All Food Chain Categories, excluding Category I.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 4 of 24
4. FSSC 22000 SCHEME REQUIREMENTS
Part 2 – Requirements for organizations to be audited against in Version 6
2.5.16 FOOD LOSS AND WASTE (ALL FOOD CHAIN CATEGORIES,
EXCLUDING I)
In addition to clause 8 of ISO 22000:2018, the organization shall:
a) Have a documented policy and objectives detailing the organization's strategy to reduce
food loss and waste within their organization and the related supply chain.
b) Have controls in place to manage products donated to not-for-profit organizations,
employees, and other organizations, and ensure that these products are safe to consume.
c) Manage surplus products or by-products intended as animal feed/food to prevent
contamination of these products.
d) These processes shall comply with the applicable legislation, be kept up to date, and not
have a negative impact on food safety.
5. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 GENERAL GUIDANCE
The definition of food loss and waste in accordance with the FSSC 22000 Scheme V6, Appendix 1,
is as follows:
• Food loss occurs before the food reaches the consumer as a result of issues in the supply
chain (production, processing, storage, and distribution phases).
• Food waste refers to food that is fit for consumption but consciously discarded at the
retail or consumption levels.
In the context of this document, wherever reference is made to food loss and waste or FLW, the
organization should only consider food loss, or food waste, or food loss and waste as relevant to
their operations and direct supply chain.
In the context of the FSSC 22000 Scheme:
• Food loss and waste only relates to food – it does not include packaging material wastage.
Therefore, the weight of packaging material is to be excluded from the measurement of
food loss and waste. However, edible packaging is considered to be food.
• Pre-harvest wastage is excluded from the measurement of food loss and waste as farming
is not covered in the scope of the FSSC 22000 Scheme.
• Food loss and waste includes both food (including ingredients, additives, drinks, pet food,
etc.) intended for consumption (human and animal alike) and associated inedible parts
removed from the food supply chain which is not intended for consumption.
• The requirement also includes safe and wholesome food rescued/recovered and supplied
to secondary markets to feed people, e.g., donations to charities. This differs from the
scope of the food loss and waste inventory report required by the FLW Protocol2, which
requires that food rescued and donated not be included in the food loss and waste
quantity accounted for in the FLW inventory report.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 5 of 24
5.2 DOCUMENTED POLICY AND OBJECTIVES
In accordance with 2.5.16 (a), the organization shall have a documented policy and objectives
detailing the organization's strategy to reduce food loss and waste within its organization and the
related supply chain.
5.2.1 GUIDANCE FOR ALL ORGANIZATIONS
In order to establish a basic food loss and waste strategy, an organization can implement the
following 3-step process1,4 :
1. Target:
a) Quantify the food loss and waste currently generated by the organization and the
supply chain they have control over in order to establish a baseline/base year quantity.
To do this, the organization should:
§ Establish the scope of their food loss and waste by:
• Identifying all the types of food loss and waste generated in each step
in the production process (e.g., procurement, processing, packing,
storage, distribution, etc.) as well as the steps in their supply chain that
are within their control.
§ Establish the time period over which to quantify the current food loss and
waste.
§ Calculate and quantify the current food loss and waste for each type of food
waste the organization generates. The organization determines the
quantification unit to be used, e.g., weight in kilograms (kg), volume in liters (L),
relevant currency, and environmental impact, e.g., percentage of greenhouse
gas emissions.
§ Determine the current processes in place to manage the food loss and waste
generated by the organization based on a defined methodology.
§ Investigate the root causes of current food loss and waste and determine how
this can be addressed.
b) Establish a prevention plan including the organization's food loss and waste objectives:
§ Decide which types of food loss and waste generated by the organization will
be focus areas, based on 1.a) above, taking into account the type, quantity, and
value of the food loss and/or waste.
§ Set objectives and targets for these types of food loss and waste:
• Short-term, e.g., annual/quarterly
• Long-term, e.g., over 5 or 10 years
The objectives and targets set may be internally established by the
organization or based on regulations or industry associations’ targets. An
organization should take into consideration whether their government or
local authority has set standards or targets relating to the reduction of
food loss and waste and aim to align with that to the extent possible.
§ Define actions to be taken to reduce the food loss and waste per type,
including responsibilities for implementing these actions, resources required,
timeframes for completion, FSMS updates needed, etc.
The actions implemented should look to:
i. Prevent food loss and waste from occurring,
ii. Rescue food for donation,
iii. Redistribute to other destinations; refer to Figure 12.
Note: The intent is to move waste up the hierarchy. E.g., waste
currently sent to a disposal destination should be investigated to
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 6 of 24
determine whether there are solutions to move this waste up to
recovery, recycling, or optimization destinations.
2. Measure:
a) Define monitoring procedures to measure food loss and waste against the
baseline/year at defined regular intervals and to determine the causes of the food loss
and waste.
b) Monitor and measure food loss and waste at defined intervals by using a defined
methodology suitable to the organization.
c) Monitor the current destination of the food loss and waste to move food loss and
waste up the food and drink material hierarchy (Figure 1).
d) Evaluate the results to determine whether the objective and target have been
achieved.
3. Act:
a) Where it has been identified that the target has not been met, the organization needs
to investigate and determine the causes for the target not being met and then
implement suitable actions to address this.
b) Where it has been identified that the target has been met, the organization should still
evaluate the current quantity of food loss and waste, as well as the destination of the
food loss and waste, to determine whether further reductions are possible and
whether another feasible destination could have a larger sustainable impact.
In addition to the above-mentioned, in accordance with 2.5.16 (d), the strategy implemented shall
comply with the applicable legislation, be kept up to date, and not have a negative impact on food
safety.
Documented information is to be available to support targets and objectives established and the
resulting measurement and monitoring. The review of the food loss and waste targets and
objectives should be considered in the management review process.
Organizations should look at ways to improve efficiencies to reduce the amount of product that
needs to be downgraded, e.g., put measures in place to assess the amount of product having to
be downgraded or sent to waste and see what target could be set to reduce this.
Where products do not meet quality parameters in line with their finished product specifications,
the organization should look for alternative markets in order to prevent the products from being
disposed of, thereby reducing food loss and waste.
Organizations should also look to review the established shelf life of their products to establish
whether the shelf life is still correct or whether the shelf life of products could be increased whilst
still being safe for consumption. This would assist in reducing food loss and waste by not
discarding products that are still safe for consumption. Effective stock rotation, e.g., FIFO and FEFO,
is also vital in reducing food loss and waste.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 7 of 24
Further detailed guidance, based on the FLW Protocol’s food loss and waste accounting and
reporting standard2 (FLWARS), is summarized under Appendix A, in line with the figure below.
Figure 2: Overview of steps in the food loss and waste accounting and reporting standard2
The FLW Protocol’s measurement tool is an example of a measurement tool that can be utilized
by organizations; other measurement tools are also available. It is up to the organization to decide
on an appropriate method and measurement tool that is suitable for their operations.
5.2.2 SPECIFIC GUIDANCE FOR ORGANIZATIONS OTHER THAN
FOOD/FEED MANUFACTURERS
In addition to 5.2.1 above, the following also applies:
5.2.2.1 FOOD CHAIN CATEGORY E ORGANIZATIONS – CATERING AND FOOD
SERVICE:
For sub-category E organizations, the strategy implemented by the organization should consider
effective inventory management (including correct ordering and stock control), training on recipe
management, menu construction to take into account multi-use ingredients (used in more than
one dish), taking seasonality into account, effective portion control, etc. Organizations can also
look to educate their customers and create awareness of food loss and waste.
5.2.2.2 FOOD CHAIN CATEGORY F ORGANIZATIONS – TRADING, RETAIL,
WHOLESALE AND E-COMMERCE:
For sub-category FI organizations, Retailers and Wholesalers, the objectives and targets they set
should also look to educate their customers and create awareness of food loss and waste to assist
in a reduction of food loss and waste at the consumer household level, e.g., via marketing and
awareness campaigns.
For sub-category FII organizations, Brokers and Traders, as they do not physically handle any
product, the objectives and targets they establish as part of their food loss and waste strategy
need to relate to the suppliers in their food supply chain. Sub-category FII organizations should
assist their suppliers with implementing food loss and waste strategies within their food supply
chain. This can be undertaken when establishing their supplier agreement with their suppliers.
5.2.2.3 FOOD CHAIN CATEGORY G ORGANIZATIONS – TRANSPORT AND STORAGE:
For category G organizations, as they do not manufacture any product, the objectives and targets
they establish as part of their food loss and waste strategy should relate to the controls they
implement to maintain the shelf-life of the product during transport and storage, so as to prevent
wastage, as well as to implement effective stock rotation systems taking FEFO (first-expired-first-
out) and FIFO (first-in-first-out) principles into account. Organizations should also look to minimize
damages resulting in product disposal, by considering moving damaged foodstuffs up the food
and drink material hierarchy (Figure 1), where it does not pose a food safety risk.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 8 of 24
5.2.2.4 FOOD CHAIN CATEGORY K ORGANIZATIONS – PRODUCTION OF
BIO/CHEMICALS:
In relation to additional requirement 2.5.16 on food loss and waste, Category K organizations
would still need to show how they meet the requirement for 2.5.16 (a) & (d). The requirements for
2.5.16 (b) and (c) may not be applicable, depending on the operations of the organization.
The organization would need to have a documented policy and objectives detailing the
organization's strategy to reduce food loss and waste within their organization and the related
supply chain.
In general, where category K organizations have products that do not meet specifications, these
out-of-specification products would likely not be wasted but downgraded to other technical
grades, thereby preventing wastage. If the organization has certain products that cannot be
downgraded, then the organization should investigate to see if there is any other use for the
product outside of the industries the organization already works in, to see if it can be used in
another manner to prevent it from having to be disposed of. The overall intent of the food loss
and waste requirement is to have organizations assess their overall food loss and waste and see
whether there are alternative avenues to prevent the wastage of useable material and see
whether an alternative destination (as per Figure 1) can be established.
In addition, the organization should look at ways to improve efficiencies to reduce the amount of
product that needs to be downgraded, e.g., put measures in place to assess the amount of product
having to be downgraded or sent to waste and see what target could be set to reduce this.
5.3 MANAGEMENT OF DONATED PRODUCTS
In accordance with 2.5.16 (b), the organization shall have controls in place to manage products
donated to not-for-profit organizations, employees, and other organizations; and ensure that
these products are safe to consume.
Where an organization has surplus product or products that do not meet quality specifications,
and they intend to rescue this product and donate it to not-for-profit organizations such as
charities and food banks, or to employees, or other organizations, then they need to ensure that
they implement suitable controls to manage these products and ensure that these products are
still safe for consumption.
The controls implemented by the organization shall take into account the applicable legislation
and shall not have a negative impact on the food safety of the donated products. Some of the
controls to be implemented by the organization include maintaining the products under the
correct storage conditions and ensuring that the traceability of the products is being maintained.
If the product to be rescued and donated is a customer-branded product, then the organization
should first obtain agreement from the customer before donating this product.
5.4 MANAGEMENT OF SURPLUS PRODUCTS OR BY-PRODUCTS
In accordance with 2.5.16 (c), the organization shall manage surplus products or by-products
intended as animal feed/food to prevent contamination of these products.
Surplus products or by-products intended as animal feed/food need to be stored separately from
waste to prevent contamination of these products and traceability maintained. In accordance with
2.5.16 (d), the products shall be managed and comply with the applicable legislation.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 9 of 24
If the surplus product is a customer-branded product, it shall be managed in accordance with
customer requirements.
6. GUIDANCE FOR AUDITORS
The following is a non-exhaustive list of questions that an auditor can use to assess the FSSC
Additional Requirement 2.5.16:
• Has a policy and objectives, with measurable and time-bound targets, been established
for food loss and waste?
• Have the objectives been met, and if not, were suitable actions taken? This would not apply
in the first year of establishing the policy and objectives.
• Does the organization donate products, and if so, are there controls in place, including
controls to ensure the food safety of these donated products?
• Does the organization produce surplus products or by-products intended as animal
feed/food, and if so, are there controls in place to prevent contamination of these
products?
• Are legal requirements and food safety taken into consideration when establishing the
policy and objectives, including any controls established?
Auditors need to verify that the necessary documented information is available.
7. REFERENCES
1. Champions 12.3. SDG Target 12.3 on Food Loss and Waste: 2022 Progress Report. URL:
Champions 12.3
2. FLW Protocol. Food Loss and Waste Accounting and Reporting Standard, V1.0, 2016. URL:
Food Loss and Waste Protocol
3. UNEP, FAO. Prevention and Reduction of Food and Drink Waste in Businesses and
Households: Guidance for Governments, Local Authorities, Businesses and Other
Organizations. Version 1.0. URL: UNEP
4. BV. Food Waste Management System - A Holistic Approach to Reduce Food Loss and Waste
Whitepaper. June 2022. URL: Bureau Veritas
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 10 of 24
8. RELATED INDUSTRY INFORMATION
The references below are not an exhaustive list, are for information purposes only, and may not
apply to all organizations. The requirements of the Scheme shall be adhered to in all cases.
• Champions 12.3. URL: Home | Champions 12.3 (champions123.org)
• Commission for Environmental Cooperation. URL : Case Studies on Food Loss and Waste
in North America (cec.org)
• European Union Guidelines on food donation. URL: EUR-Lex - 52017XC1025(01) - EN -
EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
• European Union Guidelines for the feed use of food no longer intended for human
consumption. URL: EUR-Lex - 52018XC0416(01) - EN - EUR-Lex (europa.eu)
• European Consumer Food Waste Forum. URL: European Consumer Food Waste Forum |
Knowledge for policy (europa.eu)
• EU Platform on Food Losses and Food Waste. URL: EU Platform on Food Losses and Food
Waste (europa.eu).
• EU Food Loss and Waste Prevention Hub: European Food Loss and Waste Prevention
Hub - Explore the Member States Initiatives (europa.eu)
• EU Guidance on Best Before and Use By Dates to prevent food waste. URL:
fw_lib_best_before_en.pdf (europa.eu)
• EU Farm to Fork Strategy. URL: Farm to Fork Strategy (europa.eu)
• EU Food Waste. URL: Food Waste (europa.eu)
• Interreg Europe. URL: interregeurope.eu/find-policy-solutions/policy-briefs/food-waste
• ReFED. URL: Resources and Guides | ReFED
• Stop Food Waste Australia. URL: Australian Food Pact - To Reduce Food Waste in
Australia (stopfoodwaste.com.au)
• The Consumer Goods Forum, Case Study Booklet on Food Waste. URL: Environmental-
Sustainability-Food-Waste-Booklet-2018.pdf (theconsumergoodsforum.com)
• Together Against Food Waste. URL: Together Against Food Waste
(samentegenvoedselverspilling.nl)
• UNEP, FAO. Prevention and reduction of food and drink waste in businesses and
household – Guidance for governments, local authorities, businesses and other
organizations, Version 1.0. URL: Prevention and Reduction of Food and Drink Waste in
Businesses and Households: Guidance for Governments, Local Authorities, Businesses
and Other Organisations. Version 1.0 (unep.org)
• UN Global Compact. No time to lose (Food). URL: Report: Food Loss on the Table - UN
Global Compact Network Netherlands (gcnetherlands.nl)
• WRAP. Food Waste Reduction Roadmap. URL: Food Waste Reduction Roadmap | WRAP
• WRAP. Guidance for Food Retail operations. URL: Food Retail operations | WRAP
• WRAP. Guidance for the Dairy Sector. URL: Dairy processing | WRAP
• WRAP. Guidance for the Meat Sector. URL: Meat processing | WRAP
• WRAP. Guidance for the Fresh Produce Sector. URL: Fresh produce | WRAP
• WRI. URL: Reducing Food Loss and Waste: Setting a Global Action Agenda
• WRI. URL: Reducing Food Loss and Waste: Ten Interventions to Scale Impact
• WUR. URL: The effect of date marking terminology of products with a long shelf life on
food discarding behaviour of consumers
• WUR. URL: Date marking related visual cues can reduce food waste - WUR
• WUR. URL: Wageningen researchers take a journey into the world’s food systems in
search of losses, waste and ways to solve them - WUR
• WWF-US. URL: No Food Left Behind | Pages | WWF (worldwildlife.org)
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 11 of 24
APPENDIX A
The Food Loss & Waste Protocol (FLW Protocol) has developed the Food Loss and Waste Accounting and Reporting Standard for quantifying food and/or
associated inedible parts removed from the food supply chain. The below is a condensed summary of this standard, to assist organizations in quantifying
and reporting on their food loss and waste2.
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Define goals Establish the rationale or goal of quantifying Food Loss and Waste for your
organization.
• Goals may relate to food security, economic performance, environmental
impact, or a combination thereof.
• Mandatory goal: mandatory policy or regulation established by a government
or another authority.
• Voluntary goal: Organization adopts FLW reduction goals as part of a voluntary
commitment either undertaken alone or as part of a consortium e.g., the
United Nations has set a voluntary target as part of the SDGs. Likewise, an
organization may also set its own corporate FLW reduction goal and apply it to
themselves as well as their supply chain. Industry associations may also set
goals for their members. The CGF set a target of halving food waste with its
retail and manufacturing operations members by 2025, in addition to
contributing to the UN SDGs by 2030.
Part I: Overview
Section 3 – Goals of quantifying
food loss and waste
Review accounting and
reporting principles
Principles for account and reporting include relevance, completeness, consistency,
transparency and accuracy.
Part I: Overview
Section 5 – Principles of FLW
accounting and reporting
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 12 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Establish scope This may either be established by the organization, or by an external party (industry
association, government, or intergovernmental body, etc.)
• Timeframe: the period of time for which the inventory results are being reported.
• Material type(s): the materials that are included in the inventory (food only,
inedible parts only, or both). Packaging materials are excluded.
• Destination(s): where FLW goes when removed from the food supply chain. Refer
to Figure 1 and Table 1.
• Boundary: the food category (the types of food reported on), lifecycle stage (the
stages in the food supply chain being reported on), geography (geographic borders
being reported on), and organization (organizational units being reported on).
Refer to table 1 and table 2 on the following pages.
Part II: Main requirements,
Section 6 – Establishing the
scope of a food loss and waste
inventory
TABLE 1: DESTINATION TYPES2
DESTINATION DEFINITION
Animal feed Diverting material from the food supply chain (directly or after processing) to animals. This excludes crops
intentionally grown for bioenergy, animal feed, seed, or industrial use.
Bio-based
materials/biochemical
processing
Converting material into industrial products. Examples include creating ﬁbers for packaging material; creating
bioplastics (e.g., polylactic acid); making “traditional” materials such as leather or feathers (e.g., for pillows); and
rendering fat, oil, or grease into a raw material to make products such as soaps, biodiesel, or cosmetics.
“Biochemical processing” does not refer to anaerobic digestion or production of bioethanol through
fermentation.
Co-digestion/anaerobic
digestion
Breaking down material via bacteria in the absence of oxygen. This process generates biogas and nutrient-rich
matter. Co-digestion refers to the simultaneous anaerobic digestion of FLW and other organic material in one
digester. This destination includes fermentation (converting carbohydrates, such as glucose, fructose, and
sucrose, via microbes, into alcohols in the absence of oxygen to create products such as biofuels).
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 13 of 24
DESTINATION DEFINITION
Composting/aerobic processes Breaking down material via bacteria in oxygen-rich environments. Composting refers to the production of
organic material (via aerobic processes) that can be used as a soil amendment.
Controlled combustion Sending material to a facility that is speciﬁcally designed for combustion in a controlled manner, which may
include some form of energy recovery (this may also be referred to as incineration).
Land application Spreading, spraying, injecting, or incorporating organic material onto or below the surface of the land to enhance
soil quality.
Landfill Sending material to an area of land or an excavated site that is speciﬁcally designed and built to receive wastes.
Not harvested/plowed-in Leaving crops that were ready for harvest in the ﬁeld or tilling them into the soil.
Refuse/discards/litter Abandoning material on land or disposing of it in the sea. This includes open dumps (i.e., uncovered, unlined),
open burn (i.e., not in a controlled facility), the portion of harvested crops eaten by pests, and ﬁsh discards (the
portion of total catch that is thrown away or slipped).
Sewer/wastewater treatment Sending material down the sewer (with or without prior treatment), including that which may go to a facility
designed to treat wastewater.
Other Sending material to a destination that is diﬀerent from the 10 listed above. This destination should be described.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 14 of 24
TABLE 2: EXAMPLES OF GOALS AND RELATED INVENTORY SCOPE2
ORGANIZATION
TYPE
GOAL TYPE EXAMPLE GOAL
MATERIAL
TYPE
DESTINATION TIME-FRAME BOUNDARY
Retailer Economic Reduce food loss
and waste going
to landﬁll by 50%
by 2030 in order
to reduce tipping
fee costs.
Food and
associated
inedible
parts
Landﬁll Annual • Food category: All food categories
• Geography: All countries in which
retailer operates
• Lifecycle stage: Retail (ISIC 4721
and 4722)
• Organization: All 500 stores
managed by the retailer
Food
manufacturer
Environmental Work with
suppliers in
three provinces
to reduce on-
farm food loss
and waste of
potatoes by 30%.
Food and
associated
inedible
parts
All Annual
(quantified
during harvest
season and
scaled up)
• Food category: Potatoes
• Geography: Selected provinces
• Lifecycle stage: Growing of
vegetables and melons, roots and
tubers (ISIC 0113)
• Organization: All 20 farms
supplying food manufacturer
through dedicated purchasing
contracts
Soft drink
manufacturer
Economic Reduce
quantities of
product lost in
wash water
during batch
change-over by
10% by using
new technology.
Food Sewer/
wastewater
treatment
Monthly
(to rapidly assess
the effective-
ness of the new
technology)
• Food category: soft drinks
• Geography: All locations of
processing plants
• Lifecycle stage: All economic
sectors producing FLW
(household, retail, catering/food
service, manufacturing)
• Organization: All 100
manufacturing plants
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 15 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Decide how to
quantify
Establish quantification method:
a) Assess existing data to determine if the data needed is already available, reliable, and
for the related scope. You should identify the source and scope of the available data.
b) If no existing data is available or available data is not adequate, you should undertake a
new quantification. Describe the quantification method(s) to be used, and whether it
will be a measurement or an approximation, or inference by calculation.
c) The method selected should take into consideration:
• Level of accuracy desired
• Degree of access to the food loss and waste
• Resources available
• Practical aspects
• Goals of quantification beyond the determination of the amount of food loss and
waste
Part II: Main Requirements,
Section 7 – Deciding how to
quantify food loss and waste
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 16 of 24
TABLE 3: METHODS OF QUANTIFYING FOOD LOSS AND WASTE USING MEASUREMENT OR APPROXIMATION2
MEASUREMENT OR
APPROXIMATION
METHODS DEFINITION
Direct weighing Using a measuring device to determine the weight of FLW.
Counting
Assessing the number of items that make up FLW and using the result to determine the weight;
includes using scanner data and “visual scales”. Visual scales are practical pictorial aids used in
agricultural contexts, typically to help assess the diﬀerent levels of damage by pests to stored
crops.
Assessing volume Assessing the physical space occupied by FLW and using the result to determine the weight.
Waste composition
analysis
Physically separating FLW from other material to determine its weight and composition.
Records
Using individual pieces of data that have been written down or saved, and that are often routinely
collected for reasons other than quantifying FLW (e.g., waste transfer receipts or warehouse record
books).
Diaries Maintaining a daily log of FLW and other information.
Surveys
Gathering data on FLW quantities or other information (e.g., attitudes, beliefs, self-reported
behaviors) from a large number of individuals or entities through a set of structured questions.
TABLE 4: METHODS OF QUANTIFYING FOOD LOSS AND WASTE USING INFERENCE BY CALCULATION2
INFERENCE BY
CALCULATION
METHODS DEFINITION
Mass balance
Measuring inputs (e.g., ingredients at a factory site, grain going into a silo) and outputs (e.g.,
products made, grain shipped to market) alongside changes in levels of stock and changes to the
weight of food during processing.
Modeling
Using a mathematical approach based on the interaction of multiple factors that inﬂuence the
generation of FLW.
Proxy data
Using FLW data that are outside the scope of an entity’s FLW inventory (e.g., older data, FLW data
from another country or company) to infer quantities of FLW within the scope of the entity’s
inventory.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 17 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Gather and analyze
data, and calculate
inventory results
• An organization should gather and analyze the data, as well as establish the causes
of FLW, to establish effective food loss and waste reduction strategies.
• Considerations should be given to whether the organization will measure all the food
loss and waste that occurs or whether the organization will undertake sampling and
scale up the data.
• In relation to sampling and scale-up, an organization may decide to collect data on
the amount of food loss and waste from only a sample set. Thereafter, the data may
be scaled up to generate an estimate of the total food loss and waste.
• When utilizing sampling and scaling up, an organization should distinguish between
the period of time when the sample data was collected and the timeframe for which
the inventory results are being reported, e.g.,
o Sampled six - one-week periods with specific dates, and then used this sample
data and scaled it up to represent 12 months of data. In this case, the reported
inventory timeframe would be 12 months.
• Factors should be considered when using the sampling and scale-up method,
including accounting for the differences in food loss and waste generated over a
period of time, e.g., different seasons in the year.
• If an organization quantifies the material types separately, then it should determine
the approach used to separate the materials, the specific conversion factors used,
and the source of these factors.
Part III: Other Requirements
and Recommendations Section
8 – Collecting, calculating, and
analyzing data; Section 10 –
Coordinating the analysis of
multiple food loss and waste
inventories; Appendix A, and
Appendix B
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 18 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Figure 3: Approaches for quantifying material type separately2.
Weight of packaging should also be excluded from the food loss and waste calculation.
Figure 4: Approaches for excluding the weight of packaging from food loss and waste2.
An organization should also consider whether they need to analysis and coordinate food
loss and waste inventory results across several inventories.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 19 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Determine causes
of food loss and
waste
Organizations should also determine the causes of food loss and waste, and the drivers
behind it. Identifying the causes and determining the drivers can assist organizations in
reducing food loss and waste.
TABLE 5: CAUSES AND DRIVERS OF FOOD LOSS AND WASTE BY STAGE IN THE FOOD SUPPLY CHAIN2
STAGE CAUSES DRIVERS
PRODUCTION • Spillage
• Cosmetic damage
• Damage from pests or animals
• Not harvested
• Premature or delayed harvesting
• Poor harvesting technique
• Lack of access to market or processing facilities
• Poor access to pesticides, inadequate fencing
• Price volatility resulting in commodity price too low to cover harvest cost
• Product speciﬁcations (e.g., size, cosmetic standards)
HANDLING AND
STORAGE
• Spillage
• Cosmetic damage
• Damage from pests or animals
• Rejected from market
• Unable to reach market
• Unable to sell due to quality or size
• Spoilage
• Improper drying of grains leading to fungal infection
• Inappropriate choice of storage containers
• Lack of storage facilities, including lack of cold storage
• Rough handling of products during loading and unloading
• Poor conditions during transport
• Delays at docks or national borders for inspection
PROCESSING • Spillage
• Trimming during processing
• Rejected from market
• Contamination on the processing line
• Errors in processing, resulting in defects
• Improper packaging
• Product speciﬁcations (e.g., size, cosmetic standards)
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 20 of 24
STAGE CAUSES DRIVERS
DISTRIBUTION
AND MARKET
• Product recall
• Cooked improperly
• Food cooked but not eaten
• Cosmetic damage
• Spoilage
• Past use/sell-by date
• Regular replenishment of stocks, leading consumers to select most recent
products
• Food prepared but not served
• Portion/package sizes too large
• Failure in demand forecasting
• Lack of system for food donation
CONSUMPTION • Product recall
• Cooked improperly
• Food cooked but not eaten
• Cosmetic damage
• Spoilage
• Past use/sell-by date
• Large pack sizes containing more than the consumer uses
• Inadequate planning before shopping
• Confusion over date labels on packaging
• Lack of cooking knowledge
• Inadequate storage
• Sub-optimal storage of food
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Assess uncertainty Organizations should assess and report on the degree of uncertainty in respect of the food
loss and waste calculated. The degree of uncertainty describes the likely difference
between the estimated food loss and waste quantified and the actual true amount of food
loss and waste.
Part III: Other Requirements
and Recommendations, Section
9 – Assessing uncertainty
Perform review to
verify the accuracy
and consistency of
the results
An organization should perform a review to provide assurance of the results prior to
reporting on food loss and waste publicly. This may include undertaking a peer review,
establishing verification procedures, undertaking validation, implementing quality
assurance and quality control procedures, and conducting an audit. This review may be
undertaken internally, or externally by competent third parties. The assurers should be
independent of the food loss and waste inventory and reporting process and have no
conflicts of interest.
Part III: Other Requirements
and Recommendations, Section
12 – Review and Assurance
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 21 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Report FLW
inventory
Table 5 describes the items to be included in the food loss and waste inventory report. Part III: Other Requirements
and Recommendations, Section
13 – Reporting
TABLE 6: SUMMARY OF ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED IN THE FLW INVENTORY REPORT2
REPORTING SECTION ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED
General Information • Name of entity about which information is being reported
• Contact information
• The unit of quantiﬁcation (expressed as weight)
• Date inventory prepared
• For subsequent inventories, a link to previous inventory reports and description of any methodological changes.
Scope • Timeframe (including start and end date)
• Material type (food, associated inedible parts, or both)
o If food or associated inedible parts removed from the food supply chain are accounted for separately:
§ Sources or frameworks used to categorize a material as food or as inedible parts (including
assumptions used to deﬁne whether or not material was “intended” for human consumption)
§ Approach used to calculate the separate amounts and, if applicable, all conversion factors used
and their sources
• Destination(s) and path(s) (paths only required if destination is unknown)
• Boundary, namely food category(ies), lifecycle stage(s), geography, organization (including source of classiﬁcation
used)
Conﬁrmation of the following:
• Exclusion of packaging and any other non-FLW material (and its weight);
• Reported weight of FLW reﬂecting the state in which it was generated, that is, before water was added or
before the intrinsic water weight of FLW was reduced;
• Exclusion of pre-harvest losses.
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 22 of 24
REPORTING SECTION ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED
Describe approaches used if calculations were needed to separate the weight of FLW from non-FLW materials, or to
estimate the original weight of FLW.
Inventory Results Total amount of production (in a deﬁned quantiﬁcation unit)
Total amount of FLW (in a deﬁned quantiﬁcation unit)
The amount broken down by:
• Material type (total of “food and associated inedible parts,” or separately by material type)
• Destination (if known) or total FLW by path if destination unknown.
Deciding how to quantify
FLW
Describe the quantiﬁcation method(s) used. If existing studies or data are used, identify the source and scope.
Data collection,
calculation, and analysis
If sampling and scaling of data are undertaken, describe the approach and calculations used as well as the period of
time over which sample data was collected (including start and end dates).
Assessing uncertainty Provide a qualitative description and/or quantitative assessment of the uncertainty around FLW inventory results.
If assurance is
undertaken
Create an assurance statement including:
• Whether the assurance was ﬁrst or third party
• The assurance opinion
• A summary of the assurance process
• The relevant competencies of the assurance providers
• An explanation of any potential conﬂicts of interest
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 23 of 24
REPORTING SECTION ITEMS TO BE INCLUDED
If the amount of FLW is
tracked over time and a
reduction target set
• Base year
• Scope of the target (where relevant, include reduction target and completion date) and whether all or only some
of the FLW inventory results will be tracked over time. If only some of the inventory results are being tracked,
explain why.
• Recalculation of the base FLW inventory when signiﬁcant changes in the quantiﬁcation method or assumptions
occur.
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
Set target and track
over time
An organization should select a base year, monitor performance, and make adjustments to
the base year calculation as needed.
• Now that the organization has determined their food loss and waste inventory, an
organization can set a reduction target (objective) for food loss and waste. In order to
set this target, the organization should:
o Select a base year. The amount of food loss and waste generated in the base
year can be compared with the amount generated at the end of the target
period to determine whether the target has been achieved or not.
o Identify the scope of the target (preferably aligned with the scope of the
inventory).
o Choose a target. When deciding on a target the following should be considered:
§ Target type: absolute target (specific amount e.g., reduce FLW by 15 000
tons from 2024 to 2030) vs relative targets (comparison with another
metric e.g., a national government sets a target of reducing FLW by 50 %
per capita from 2023 levels by 2030).
§ Target completion date: The date should be expressed in the same unit
of time as was used to set the base year e.g., 12-month period. An
organization should have both short term and long-term targets.
§ Target level: Either set internally or by an external party such as
National Government or industry association.
o Monitoring performance against targets: An organization should develop a FLW
monitoring plan. The following should be taken into consideration:
Part III: Other Requirements
and Recommendations, Section
14 – Setting targets and tracking
changes over time
Guidance Document: Food Loss and Waste
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 24 of 24
STEP GUIDANCE/ADDITIONAL DETAIL REFERENCE IN FLWARS2
§ Quantification frequency: Minimum at the start and end of the target
period.
§ Ensuring consistency of scope and reducing uncertainty by choosing a
quantification method that provides a high degree of accuracy, using a
robust sampling approach to minimize uncertainties.
§ Ensuring consistency of the quantification method.
o Recalculating base year food loss and waste when significant changes occur
such as structural changes to the organization e.g., mergers; changes to the
scope of the inventory; changes in calculation methodologies, significant errors
identified; changes in boundaries; and changes in conversion factors. An
organization can also establish their most recent years results as their base
year if it is not in conflict with their reduction goals or targets.
Quantifying and reporting the weight of food rescued2
Although the Food Loss and Waste Accounting and Reporting Standard focuses on material no longer in the food supply chain, and therefore food
rescued or transferred from one part of the food supply chain to another is outside the scope of this Standard, the Standard still includes guidelines
for quantifying and reporting the weight of food rescued. Refer to Appendix E of the Food Loss and Waste Accounting and Reporting Standard for
further guidance2.
