Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 0 of 19
FSSC 22000
Version 2 | July 2023
GUIDANCE DOCUMENT: FOOD SAFETY AND
QUALITY CULTURE
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 1 of 19
CONTENTS
REVISION HISTORY...........................................................................................................................1
1. INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................2
2. GFSI REQUIREMENT ..................................................................................................................2
3. FSSC 22000 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8 .......................................................................2
4. GFSI GUIDING QUESTIONS .......................................................................................................3
5. FSSC 22000 GUIDANCE..............................................................................................................3
6. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTING FOOD SAFETY AND QUALITY CULTURE............................4
7. ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE BASED ON PAS 320: DEVELOPING AND SUSTAINING A MATURE
FOOD SAFETY CULTURE GUIDE .....................................................................................................17
8. REFERENCES.............................................................................................................................19
REVISION HISTORY
Date Published Issue Changes
November 2020 1 First publication
July 2023 2 Updates made in line with Version 6 of the FSSC 22000 Scheme and
to include reference to PAS 320:2023.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 2 of 19
1. INTRODUCTION
GFSI defines food safety culture as “shared values, beliefs and norms that affect mindset and
behavior toward food safety in, across and throughout an organization” (GFSI 2020.1).
The definition derives from existing literature on organizational and food safety culture and is
made practical and applicable through the group’s work.
A mature food safety culture is one in which the company vision and mission have been broken
down into the finer details of expectations for every department and person throughout the
organization.
2. GFSI REQUIREMENT
The GFSI benchmarking document contains the following requirement that shall be implemented
by GFSI-approved Certification Program Owners (CPO) and audited onsite.
Requirement: Evidence of the senior management’s commitment to establish, implement,
maintain, and continuously improve the Food Safety Management System
shall be provided. This shall include elements of food safety culture, at a
minimum consisting of:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Feedback from employees and
• Performance measurement on food safety-related activities.
3. FSSC 22000 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8
Included in FSSC 22000 Version 6, under Part 2 of the Scheme, is the additional requirement 2.5.8
on Food Safety and Quality Culture. This requirement is applicable to all food chain categories.
The requirement is aligned with the requirement of GFSI. The additional requirement 2.5.8
indicates:
a) In accordance with and in addition to clause 5.1 of ISO 22000:2018, as part of the organization’s
commitment to cultivating a positive food safety and quality culture, senior management shall
establish, implement, and maintain a food safety and quality culture objective(s) as part of the
management system. The following elements shall be addressed as a minimum:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Employee feedback and engagement, and
• Performance measurement of defined activities covering all sections of the
organization’s impact on food safety and quality.
b) The objective(s) shall be supported by a documented food safety and quality culture plan, with
targets and timelines included in the management review and continuous improvement
processes of the management system.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 3 of 19
4. GFSI GUIDING QUESTIONS
GFSI has drafted a set of guiding questions that could be used when auditing an organization
against a GFSI-approved certification Scheme.
5. FSSC 22000 GUIDANCE
This FSSC 22000 guidance document includes guidance for auditors and organizations on
assessing food safety and quality culture within their organization in accordance with the FSSC
22000 Additional Requirement 2.5.8 as well as how the GFSI guiding questions link to ISO
22000:2018 and the overall FSMS.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 4 of 19
6. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTING FOOD SAFETY AND QUALITY CULTURE
FSSC 22000 VERSION 6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8
In accordance with and in addition to clause 5.1 of ISO 22000:2018, as part of the organization’s commitment to cultivating a positive food safety and
quality culture, senior management shall establish, implement, and maintain a food safety and quality culture objective(s) as part of the management
system. The following elements shall be addressed as a minimum:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Employee feedback and engagement, and
• Performance measurement of defined activities covering all sections of the organization impacting food safety and quality.
GUIDANCE ON AUDITING THE COMMUNICATION ELEMENT
• Senior management can demonstrate their engagement with food safety by establishing expectations for every department and person
throughout the organization with regard to food safety and quality culture, e.g., establish whether this is included within job descriptions.
• Verify how food safety and quality culture aspects are communicated throughout the organization, e.g., establish if the organization has a
communication policy and communication matrix.
• Verify how top management has verified that all staff, e.g., understand food safety and quality culture expectations, verify whether this is included
within induction and annual training for personnel, and whether it included an assessment of personnel’s understanding.
• Interview personnel on the shop floor to determine whether employees know their responsibilities and what they are accountable for in relation
to food safety and quality-related tasks. Verify how personnel receive feedback on production performance and food safety/quality issues, e.g.,
verify if there are weekly or monthly production meetings and include feedback on production performance and food safety/quality issues.
• Assess during interviews with top management whether they can explain the organization’s food safety and quality expectations and how they
are used in the decision-making processes.
• Assess during interviews with the shop floor to which level personnel are informed on food safety and quality expectations. E.g., check the level
of comfort and ease with which the auditee explains or responds when asked about the expectations, such as whether they know what to do
when a non-conformance occurs. Can they describe for their section/area of work what non-conformance is?
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 5 of 19
• Assess the capability of top management to react to, e.g., customer complaints or supplier issues, in a timely and effective manner whilst ensuring
the right decisions are made. This can be assessed during the interview with top management as well as when sampling customer complaints
and corrective actions.
• Assess whether food safety and quality-related expectations are communicated in a language understood by the personnel on the shop floor.
E.g., Look out for examples of translated materials either posted on the walls where employees work or other areas such as the canteen walls.
• Verify that training material is available and translations are in the local language and sample and examine answer sheets if written tests are
used for verification of competence.
COMMUNICATION
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
How do your senior leaders
engage with food safety?
Clause 5.1, d)
Top management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment
with respect to the FSMS by communicating the importance of
effective food safety management and conforming to the FSMS
requirements, applicable statutory and regulatory requirements,
and mutually agreed-on customer requirements related to food
safety.
Assessment of this ISO 22000 clause shall
also include the expectations for every
department and person throughout the
organization with regard to food safety
culture.
How is your messaging used to
communicate food safety
expectations to all employees?
Clause 5.2.2, a) and b)
The food safety policy shall be:
a) be available and maintained as documented information;
b) be communicated, understood, and applied at all levels
within the organization;
Assessment of this ISO 22000 clause shall
also include a detailed assessment of
how food safety culture aspects are
communicated throughout the
organization.
Is your company’s vision and
mission clearly expressed so
that all staff understands both?
Clause 5.2.2, b)
The food safety policy shall be communicated, understood, and
applied at all levels within the organization;
Assessment of this ISO 22000 clause shall
also include how top management has
verified that all staff understands food
safety culture expectations.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 6 of 19
COMMUNICATION
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
Are you confident that all
employees know their
responsibilities and are held
accountable for their food
safety-related tasks and that
accountabilities are well-
connected?
Clause 5.3.1
Top management shall ensure that the responsibilities and
authorities for relevant roles are assigned, communicated, and
understood within the organization.
Clause 7.4.3
The organization shall establish, implement, and maintain an
effective system for communicating issues having an impact
on food safety. To maintain the effectiveness of the FSMS, the
organization shall ensure that the food safety team is informed
in a timely manner of changes in the following: a) – m).
The assessment shall be included in the
interview with personnel on the shop floor.
Look for evidence that feedback personnel
receives on production performance and food
safety issues.
Can you articulate your
company’s food safety
expectations and how they are
applied to every decision?
Clause 4.2
To ensure that the organization has the ability to consistently
provide products and services that meet applicable statutory,
regulatory, and customer requirements with regard to food
safety, the organization shall determine:
c) the interested parties that are relevant to the FSMS;
d) the relevant requirements of the interested parties of
the FSMS.
The organization shall identify, review and update information
related to the interested parties and their requirements.
Clause 6.2
The organization shall establish objectives for the FSMS at
relevant functions and levels.
This shall be addressed when interviewing top
management.
Also, check when interviewing personnel at the
shop floor to assess to which level personnel is
informed on food safety expectations.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 7 of 19
COMMUNICATION
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
Does your strategy enable you
to respond quickly and
effectively, with appropriate
oversight, to ensure the right
decisions are made?
Clause 4.1
The organization shall determine external and internal issues that
are relevant to its purpose and that affect its ability to achieve the
intended result(s) of its FSMS.
The organization shall identify, review and update information
related to these external and internal issues.
Clause 6.3
When the organization determines the need for changes to the
FSMS, including personnel changes, the changes shall be carried out
and communicated in a planned manner.
The organization shall consider:
e) the purpose of the changes and their potential
consequences;
f) the continued integrity of the FSMS;
g) the availability of resources to effectively implement the
changes;
h) the allocation or re-allocation of responsibilities and
authorities.
Clause 9.3
Top management shall review the organization’s FSMS at planned
intervals to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy, and
effectiveness.
The top management decision-making
process determines this and should be
addressed during an interview with top
management. Specifically, look at the
capability of top management to react to,
e.g., customer complaints or supplier
issues.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 8 of 19
Can you identify examples of
where using industry
intelligence has helped identify
potential hazards or risks to
your business?
Clause 4.1
The organization shall determine external and internal issues that
are relevant to its purpose and that affect its ability to achieve the
intended result(s) of its FSMS.
The organization shall identify, review and update information
related to these external and internal issues.
Specifically, address NOTE 2 to this clause
when interviewing top management.
Industry intelligence is also part of
understanding the context.
FSSC 22000 VERSION 6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8
In accordance with and in addition to clause 5.1 of ISO 22000:2018, as part of the organization’s commitment to cultivating a positive food safety and
quality culture, senior management shall establish, implement, and maintain a food safety and quality culture objective(s) as part of the management
system. The following elements shall be addressed as a minimum:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Employee feedback and engagement, and
• Performance measurement of defined activities covering all sections of the organization impacting on food safety and quality.
GUIDANCE ON AUDITING THE TRAINING ELEMENT
• Assess the overall training program of the organization, including the content, e.g., evaluate the ’organization's training procedure, training
matrix, and records of training, and determine whether it addressed relevant topics.
• Assessment of competency during the interview of personnel on the shop floor. E.g., Check for level of comfort in having a conversation on
the topic directed at any person along the production line, not just the team leaders or Supervisors.
• Verify evidence that personnel have participated in food safety training, including whether personnel undertaking activities related to CCPs
and OPRPs have been trained in this regard and whether they were assessed and found competent. E.g., request retained evidence of
training such as attendance registers and written tests/signed-off records of on-the-task observation and allow sufficient time to stand and
observe employees at work during production and look out for good practices. This also applies to training on quality control parameters.
• Verify that the organization’s training program addresses hazard and risk management controls in personnel’s area of work and what actions
would be taken in the case they were not adhered to. Evaluate documented evidence that this training was undertaken.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 9 of 19
TRAINING
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
When was your last food
safety training, and what did
you learn?
Clause 7.2, b)
The organization shall ensure that these persons, including the food
safety team and those responsible for the operation of the hazard
control plan, are competent on the basis of appropriate education,
training, and/or experience.
Assess the overall training program of the
organization.
The assessment shall also be included in
the interview with personnel on the shop
floor. Look for evidence that personnel
have participated in food safety training.
How do you educate staff to
understand why the hazard
and risk management controls
in their areas are so important,
and what would be the
consequences of not following
them?
Clause 7.3
The organization shall ensure that all relevant persons doing work
under the organization’s control shall be aware of their individual
contribution to the effectiveness of the FSMS, including the benefits
of improved food safety performance and the implications of not
conforming with the FSMS requirements.
This should be addressed in the
organization’s training program. Assess
the content of the training program and
training.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 10 of 19
FSSC 22000 VERSION 6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8
In accordance with and in addition to clause 5.1 of ISO 22000:2018, as part of the organization’s commitment to cultivating a positive food safety and
quality culture, senior management shall establish, implement, and maintain a food safety and quality culture objective(s) as part of the management
system. The following elements shall be addressed as a minimum:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Employee feedback and engagement, and
• Performance measurement of defined activities covering all sections of the organization impacting on food safety and quality.
GUIDANCE ON AUDITING THE FEEDBACK FROM EMPLOYEES’ ELEMENT
• Assess when last the organization raised a food safety or quality concern whilst interviewing the food safety team (leader) and/or personnel
on the shop floor. E.g., Refer to their defined process for internal communication regarding food safety and quality issues and use it to check
if it is followed, confirm the target recipients and what feedback was received from them.
• Assess the specific food safety and quality concerns raised by personnel and how this has been managed by the food safety team and top
management, including a review of documented evidence. Determine whether the organization has a confidential reporting system in place
for employees to communicate these issues in a confidential manner. E.g., Check for what platforms have been set up by the organization
to ensure open lines of communication through online chatting platforms created specifically for food safety-related issues, anonymous tip-
off email or telephone numbers for employees to use, and so on.
• Assess how personnel contribute to food safety and quality in the organization whilst interviewing personnel on the shop floor. E.g., ask
personnel how they communicate suggestions, whom they speak to, and when.
• Assess whether personnel are actively involved in safeguarding food safety. E.g., taking pride in their own workspace, taking accountability
for themselves and one another, and looking out for following rules set per department or area of work by observing during the audit.
• Observe whether personnel are committed and adhere to the food safety and quality expectations of the organization whilst on the shop
floor, e.g., observe employees entering the facility and assess whether they have followed the correct entering procedures, including hand
washing and proper wearing of PPE.
• Assess whether the FSMS documentation is designed to support employees’ food safety and quality decisions and behaviors. E.g., check that
instructions are available and clear in a simple step-by-step guide/format and check that the latest updated information is made available at
the point of use.
• Assess whether personnel are included in the design and improvement of food safety and quality-related protocols and instructions. Verify
that the food safety team is involved in this and whether the food safety team and top management include personnel in this process. Assess
how their feedback is received and evaluated.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 11 of 19
• Assess how protocols and instructions are validated on the shop floor.
FEEDBACK FROM EMPLOYEES
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
When was the last time you or
someone on your team raised
a food safety concern?
Clause 5.3.3
All persons shall have the responsibility to report the
problem(s) with regard to the FSMS to identified person(s).
The assessment shall be done when
interviewing the food safety team (leader)
and/or personnel on the shop floor. Look
specifically for food safety concerns raised by
personnel and how the food safety team and
top management have managed this.
How do you contribute to food
safety in your organization?
Clause 7.3, c)
The organization shall ensure that all relevant persons doing
work under the organization’s control shall be aware of their
individual contribution to the effectiveness of the FSMS,
including the benefits of improved food safety performance.
The assessment shall be included in the
interview with personnel on the shop floor.
Look for evidence that personnel are actively
involved in safeguarding food safety.
To what level are people
committed and acting in
accordance with food safety
expectations?
Clause 7.1.2
The organization shall ensure that the persons necessary to
operate and maintain an effective FSMS are competent (see
7.2).
The assessment shall be done by interviewing
personnel on the shop floor. Look for evidence
that personnel are actively involved in
safeguarding food safety.
Is your documentation
designed to support
employees’ food safety
decisions and behaviors?
Clause 7.5.1, b)
The organization’s FSMS shall include documented information
determined by the organization as being necessary for the
effectiveness of the FSMS;
Specifically, address the NOTE to this clause
when assessing.
NOTE: The extent of documented information
for an FSMS can differ from one organization to
another due to:
• the size of the organization and its type of
activities, processes, products, and services;
• the complexity of processes and their
interactions;
the competence of persons.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 12 of 19
FEEDBACK FROM EMPLOYEES
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
Are employees engaged in the
design and improvement of
food safety-related protocols
and instructions?
Clause 5.3.2
The food safety team leader shall be responsible for:
i) ensuring the FSMS is established, implemented,
maintained, and updated;
j) managing and organizing the work of the food safety
team;
k) ensuring relevant training and competencies for the
food safety team (see 7.2);
l) reporting to top management on the effectiveness and
suitability of the FSMS.
In principle, personnel are represented by the
food safety team.
Look for evidence of how the food safety team
and top management involve personnel or
personnel representative group when
developing protocols and instructions.
How are protocols and instructions validated
on the shop floor?
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 13 of 19
FSSC 22000 VERSION 6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT 2.5.8
In accordance with and in addition to clause 5.1 of ISO 22000:2018, as part of the organization’s commitment to cultivating a positive food safety and
quality culture, senior management shall establish, implement, and maintain a food safety and quality culture objective(s) as part of the management
system. The following elements shall be addressed as a minimum:
• Communication,
• Training,
• Employee feedback and engagement, and
• Performance measurement of defined activities covering all sections of the organization impacting on food safety and
quality.
GUIDANCE ON AUDITING THE PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT ELEMENT
• Assess how the organization’s food safety and quality performance is measured, e.g., are food safety and quality performance targets
established and monitored?
• Assessment shall be included in the interview with personnel on the shop floor, e.g., check to see if departmental targets have been set,
ask how they are monitored and how often they are reported on, and request evidence.
• Verify how personnel receive feedback on production performance and food safety/quality issues, e.g., an overall company dashboard
clearly showing the food safety/quality performance.
• Assess how top management evaluates food safety/quality performance. E.g., a personnel survey that is executed periodically, specifically
related to food safety/quality, including the food safety and quality culture of the organization.
• Assess how complaints and nonconformance issues are managed by the organization and top management, including a review of corrective
action reports. E.g., check to see if trends of similar complaints are identified and select a few reports to follow the trail of what actions have
been taken, verify the level of cause analysis and sufficiency of actions taken to correct each of the issues, verify the effectiveness of the
actions taken by asking if any further complaints or non-conformances of similar nature have been received.
• Assess how increased productivity affects the food safety and quality culture of the organization. E.g., are there more NCs during peak
production?
• Evaluate how the organization plans for changes and manages changes, including reviewing documented evidence thereof. Assess the
capability of top management to react to, e.g., customer complaints or supplier issues, by sampling customer complaints and non-
conformances.
• Evaluate how the organization implements changes based on trending results, e.g., verify the output from management reviews.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 14 of 19
• Assess the organization’s management of near misses and the actions taken from near misses to drive continuous improvement, e.g., where
trended data indicates the results are nearing an unacceptable level, what action is taken by the organization prior to the limit being
exceeded?
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT ON FOOD SAFETY-RELATED ACTIVITIES
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
How is your food safety performance
measured?
Clause 9.1.2
The organization shall analyze and evaluate
appropriate data and information arising from
monitoring and measurement, including the
results of verification activities related to PRPs
and the hazard control plan (see 8.8 and 8.5.4),
internal audits (see 9.2), and external audits.
Clause 9.3.2
Management review input.
The assessment shall be included in the
interview with personnel on the shop floor.
Look for evidence as to which feedback
personnel receive on production performance
and food safety issues. E.g., an overall
company dashboard clearly showing the food
safety performance.
Also, assess how top management evaluates
food safety performance. E.g., a personnel
survey that is executed periodically.
How do you anticipate, manage, and respond
to change, learn from the past, and prepare for
the future?
Clause 6.1.1
When planning for the FSMS, the organization
shall consider the issues referred to in 4.1 and
the requirements referred to in 4.2 and 4.3 and
determine the risks and opportunities that
need to be addressed to:
m) give assurance that the FSMS can
achieve its intended result(s);
n) enhance desirable effects;
o) prevent or reduce undesired effects;
achieve continual improvement.
The top management decision-making process
determines this and should be addressed
during the interview with top management.
Specifically, look at the capability of top
management to react to, e.g., customer
complaints or supplier issues.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 15 of 19
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT ON FOOD SAFETY-RELATED ACTIVITIES
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
How does what you measure (e.g., customer
complaints, compliance to procedures,
productivity, etc.) influence your food safety
culture?
Are your measurements related to
volume/efficiency at the expense of food safety
measures?
Clause 9.1.2
The organization shall analyze and evaluate
appropriate data and information arising from
monitoring and measurement, including the
results of verification activities related to PRPs
and the hazard control plan (see 8.8 and 8.5.4),
internal audits (see 9.2), and external audits.
Clause 10.2
The organization shall continually improve the
suitability, adequacy, and effectiveness of the
FSMS.
Top management shall ensure that the
organization continually improves the
effectiveness of the FSMS through the use of
communication (see 7.4), management review
(see 9.3), internal audit (see 9.2), analysis of
results of verification activities (see 8.8.2),
validation of control measure(s) and
combination(s) of control measure(s) (see
8.5.3), corrective actions (see 8.9.3) and FSMS
updating (see 10.3).
Assess how the organization and top
management manage complaints and non-
conformance issues.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 16 of 19
PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT ON FOOD SAFETY-RELATED ACTIVITIES
GFSI GUIDING QUESTION ISO 22000:2018 GUIDANCE
How do you review your “near-misses” and use
this information to drive improvements in your
food safety system?
Clause 8.9.1
The organization shall ensure that data derived
from the monitoring of OPRPs and at CCPs are
evaluated by designated persons who are
competent and have the authority to initiate
corrections and corrective actions.
Clause 10.3
Top management shall ensure that the FSMS is
continually updated. To achieve this, the food
safety team shall evaluate the FSMS at planned
intervals. The team shall consider whether it is
necessary to review the hazard analysis (see
8.5.2), the established hazard control plan (see
8.5.4), and the established PRPs (see 8.2). The
updating activities shall be based on:
p) input from communication, external as
well as internal (see 7.4);
q) input from other information
concerning the suitability, adequacy,
and effectiveness of the FSMS;
r) output from the analysis of results of
verification activities (see 9.1.2);
s) output from management review (see
9.3).
System updating activities shall be retained as
documented information and reported as input
to the management review (see 9.3).
Also included is the management of near misses
in the assessment of this clause.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 17 of 19
7. ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE BASED ON PAS 320:
DEVELOPING AND SUSTAINING A MATURE FOOD
SAFETY CULTURE GUIDE
The British Standards Institution (BSI) has developed a publicly available standard for use as
guidance and advisory recommendations that provide further clarity for implementing food safety
and quality culture.
Below are aspects to consider as established by PAS 3203, however, in addition, the below also
indicates where these aspects can be integrated within your FSMS via cross-reference to the
relevant ISO 22000:2018 clauses and the inclusion of quality:
• Understanding the fundamentals of a food safety (and quality) culture and the context of
the organization: (Integrate with clause 4 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Defining the concept of a food safety (and quality) culture
- Establishing the relationship between food safety (and quality) culture and the
organizational culture
- Understanding the organization’s internal and external issues
• Establishing the governance for a food safety (and quality) culture: (Integrate with clause 5
of ISO 22000:2018)
- Top management commitment, accountability, and consistency;
- Defining the organization’s vision, mission, and values;
- Establishing the policy for a food safety (and quality) culture;
- Establishing and managing organizational structure, responsibilities,
accountabilities, and authorities.
• Understanding the organization’s food safety (and quality) culture: (Integrate with clause 4
of ISO 22000:2018)
- Determining the current maturity level of the organization’s food safety (and
quality) culture,
- Determining the desired food safety (and quality) culture.
• Designing a strategic change plan to achieve the desired food safety (and quality) culture:
(Integrate with clause 6 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Identifying the drivers of change,
- Establishing the organization’s readiness to drive change to achieve the desired
food safety (and quality) culture,
- Mapping the needs, behaviors, expectations, and changes to the existing FSMS
against the culture maturity gaps,
- Determining food safety (and quality) risks and opportunities,
- Setting priorities for positive food safety (and quality) culture change,
- Establishing a change plan for the organization’s food safety (and quality) culture.
• Preparing the key functions towards a food safety (and quality) culture: (Integrate with
clause 7 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Resources,
- Developing competence and awareness,
- Communicating and nudging,
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 18 of 19
- Documentation.
• Embedding the change plan of the organization’s food safety (and quality) culture into the
existing FSMS: (Integrate with clause 8.1 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Managing and embedding change
- Managing disruptions and crises
• Evaluating the performance of the organization’s food safety (and quality) culture:
(Integrate with clause 9 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Monitoring and measuring
- Verifying
- Analyzing, evaluating, and reporting
- Management review
• Sustaining the continual improvement of the organization’s food safety (and quality)
culture: (Integrate with clause 10 of ISO 22000:2018)
- Continual improvement
- Reporting near misses
- Applying interventions
- Recognizing people and celebrating gains
- Updating
Figure 1 – PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) cycle for Food Safety Culture3
PAS 320 is freely available for download from the BSI website.
Guidance Document: Food Safety and Quality Culture
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | July 2023 19 of 19
8. REFERENCES
1. FSSC 22000 V6 Additional requirement
2. ISO 22000:2018 Food safety management systems – Requirements for any organization in the
food chain
3. PAS 320:2023 Developing and sustaining a mature food safety culture – Guide.
