[Geef de tekst op] [Geef de tekst op] [Geef de tekst op]
FSSC 22000
Version 1 | September 2023
GUIDANCE DOCUMENT: EQUIPMENT
MANAGEMENT
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 1 of 12
CONTENTS
REVISION HISTORY...........................................................................................................................1
1. PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................................2
2. INTRODUCTION.........................................................................................................................2
3. SCOPE .........................................................................................................................................3
4. FSSC 22000 SCHEME REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................3
5. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTATION.........................................................................................3
5.1 General Guidance................................................................................................................................3
5.2 Purchase Specification ........................................................................................................................4
5.3 Risk-based Change Management Process ........................................................................................5
5.4 Additional Guidance............................................................................................................................8
6. GUIDANCE FOR AUDITORS .....................................................................................................11
7. REFERENCES.............................................................................................................................12
8. RELATED INDUSTRY INFORMATION......................................................................................12
REVISION HISTORY
Date Published Issue Changes
September 2023 1 First publication
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 2 of 12
1. PURPOSE
Guidance Document to assist FSSC 22000 certified organizations on how to implement equipment
management in their food safety management systems.
2. INTRODUCTION
FSSC 22000 additional requirement 2.5.15 on equipment management is applicable to all food
chain categories, except subcategory FII on brokering and trading.
The definition of equipment as per GFSI (v2020.1) is as follows:
Machines and equipment (including their parts and components necessary to link them together, and
their services and utensils necessary for their operation), feed and food transport systems to bring
ingredients/packaging to them, together with food storage and display units to allow the processing and
retail of food, feed and packaging materials in GFSI scopes of recognitions.
The equipment management requirement included within the Scheme has been incorporated to
ensure hygienic design has been taken into consideration at the purchasing stage, as well as to
ensure that the associated risks of new equipment or changes to existing equipment have been
considered within the organization's FSMS.
Hygienic design is a design that minimizes the risk of contributing to the microbiological, chemical,
and physical contamination of food. It ensures the equipment accommodates and withstands the
cleaning, sanitizing, and inspection processes involved. The equipment's hygienic design enables
it to hold up against high temperature and high-pressure washdown, including, where applicable,
exposure to cleaning chemicals depending on the industry3.
Good hygienic design of equipment can have a significant impact on the safety of the food to be
consumed, and if done incorrectly, it would have adverse effects on the people who consume the
final products and the brand integrity of the manufacturing organizations.
Principles of hygienic design include1:
• Accessibility
• Cleanability
• Drainability
• Material compatibility
• Segregation
• Surface and Geometry
EHEDG (The European Hygienic Engineering and Design Group), the European Committee for
Standardization (CE), NAMI (The North America Meat Institute), 3-A SSI, etc., are some of the
agencies that provide support and guidance for industry in relation to hygienic design of
equipment.
Some of these organizations also provide hygienic design training courses based on recognized
training programs, e.g., EHEDG, 3-A SSI1.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 3 of 12
GFSI also identifies equipment hygienic design to be of importance in the food industry and has
specific requirements for Category JI and JII organizations1. Although the FSSC 22000 Scheme does
not cover Category JI and JII, some of these requirements identified by GFSI for the hygienic design
of equipment is a valuable source of information for organizations to consider when implementing
the FSSC 22000 Additional Requirement 2.5.15 on Equipment Management.
3. SCOPE
This FSSC 22000 Guidance document is meant as a guideline for the food industry to provide
practical information and guidance on implementing FSSC 22000 Additional Requirement 2.5.15
Equipment Management for All Food Chain Categories, excluding FII.
4. FSSC 22000 SCHEME REQUIREMENTS
Part 2 – Requirements for organizations to be audited in Version 6
2.5.15 EQUIPMENT MANAGEMENT (ALL FOOD CHAIN CATEGORIES, EXCLUDING FII)
In addition to clause 8.2.4 of ISO 22000:2018, the organization shall:
a) Have a documented purchase specification in place, which addresses the hygienic design,
applicable legal and customer requirements, and the intended use of the equipment,
including the product handled. The supplier shall provide evidence of meeting the
purchase specification prior to installation.
b) Establish and implement a risk-based change management process for new equipment
and/or any changes to existing equipment, which shall be adequately documented,
including evidence of successful commissioning. Possible effects on existing systems shall
be assessed, and adequate control measures determined and implemented.
5. GUIDANCE FOR IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 GENERAL GUIDANCE
In the context of the FSSC 22000 Scheme:
• This requirement relates to significant changes to equipment, which can affect its hygienic
design. It does not cover maintenance-related activities such as changing a fuse or
replacing a fraying conveyor belt. This is addressed under the maintenance section of the
relevant PRP sector-specific standard, such as clause 8.6 of ISO/TS 22002-1. Whereas
modifications such as installing an additional conveyor belt to an existing line for the
purpose of speeding up production would be considered a significant change that would
require a review of the design of the existing line, and therefore a hygienic design risk
assessment would be required. Another example would be installing a stainless-steel tray
beneath a conveyor belt that transfers bread rolls from the cooling line to a packing
machine to minimize the build-up of product crumbs beneath the packing line.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 4 of 12
• The equipment management requirement would not directly impact on existing
equipment except when there are significant changes to the equipment. In this case, the
organization would need to assess the impact on the process and system to ensure
adequate control measures have been implemented to address any hazards and food
safety.
• Purchasing second-hand equipment would be seen as "new" equipment, and therefore
the organization would need to make sure that hygienic design has been considered as
part of the purchase specification and the requirements of this clause would apply.
• The organization is not required to assess its current existing equipment against this
requirement, unless existing equipment undergoes significant change; however, it is
important to note that hazards and associated risks relating to current equipment would
still need to be addressed within the hazard analysis under clause 8.5 of ISO 22000:2018.
5.2 PURCHASE SPECIFICATION
In accordance with 2.5.15 (a), an organization shall have a documented purchase specification
in place that addresses the hygienic design, applicable legal and customer requirements, and the
intended use of the equipment, including the product handled.
It is important for food safety management that expectations and interpretations of needs,
capabilities, and intended use are clear during the development, realization, or handover of food
processing equipment when it is newly purchased from the manufacturer.
In accordance with the requirement, the organization needs to document a purchase specification
for each piece of equipment prior to purchasing the equipment. This specification needs to
address the specific hygienic design parameters for the specific type of equipment being
ordered/manufactured.
The intended use of the equipment must be specified, including the product handled, e.g., burger
patty packing machine or corn chip fryer, etc. To establish the purchase specification, the
organization should conduct an equipment design risk assessment that takes into account the
intended use of the equipment, food safety hazard identification, and evaluation (risk
assessment).
Once the intended use is known, and the risks related to the type of products to be packed or
manufactured have been identified based on the outcome of the risk assessment, the hygienic
design principles required to ensure food safety should then be adopted/specified within the
purchase specification. Where there are specific customer and legal requirements, these must be
incorporated in the purchase specification as well.
The design of the equipment must ensure that the equipment is suitable for the intended use and
that (potential) contamination of the product is minimized. This can include features such as see-
through covers over the burger patty forming line to minimize handling of the products by the
operator or a fail-safe lid for the fryer to control/limit opening and closing while the frying process
is taking place. Recognized hygienic design standards for the specific industry should be
considered. The specification must be documented and implemented every time new equipment
is planned to be purchased.
Organizations should also include a requirement in the purchase specification that the equipment
manufacturers have the responsibility of informing the organization of any food safety risks that
could not be eliminated by hygienic design and also of providing the organization with an
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 5 of 12
instruction manual covering information needed for hygienic safe operation within the limits of
use of the respective equipment. This includes but is not limited to:
• Instructions regarding limitations and operational use
• Instructions regarding technical measures (e.g., control or inspection devices)
• Instructions regarding disassembling for inspection, cleaning, and maintenance
• Instructions for cleaning1
For changes to existing equipment or even equipment custom-made by the Certified
Organization's own engineers or maintenance technicians, specifications can be written by using
the expertise from different departments that form part of the Food Safety Team, or if the
expertise does not exist within the company's own personnel, the assistance of external experts
can be used.
Items to consider, for example, can include the hygienic design of the materials used for the
construction of the equipment, i.e., stainless steel, smooth and continuous edges where welding
is done, fasteners are to be avoided in or above the product contact zone, rounding of piping and
ductwork instead of sharp bends and corners to prevent dead ends in enclosed fittings, mounting
on legs/ wheels to facilitate cleaning and sanitation around the piece of equipment, ease of
disassembly for deep clean purposes, etc.
A service-level agreement should be drawn up between the supplier/manufacturer and the
purchasing organization.
In accordance with 2.5.15 (a), the supplier shall provide evidence of meeting the purchase
specification prior to installation.
The equipment manufacturer/supplier must provide evidence of meeting the purchase
specification(s) and the requirements set out therein, including any customer and regulatory
requirements, e.g., the manufacturer's manual can be compared to the purchase specification and
evidence of this review maintained.
5.3 RISK-BASED CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
In accordance with 2.5.15 (b), an organization shall establish and implement a risk-based change
management process for new equipment and/or any changes to existing equipment, which shall
be adequately documented, including evidence of successful commissioning.
The objective of change control is to handle changes in such a manner that the impact on food
safety by a change is foreseen and not missed and that the correct mitigation actions and control
measures are executed.
Change control consists of the organization undertaking a risk assessment, determining risk
mitigation based on hygienic design principles as well as documenting the changes1. The Food
Safety Team should ensure that the relevant managers are aware of these requirements in order
to ensure that the change management process is followed.
Installation and commissioning phase1:
• Installation: During installation, check that the correct equipment has been received and
has been installed according to the approved specification. For equipment that has been
prefabricated (assembled and/or assigned) at the equipment suppliers' site, a factory-
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 6 of 12
acceptance test (FAT) should be performed by the purchasing organization at the
supplier's site prior to delivery at the purchasing organization.
• Commissioning: After installation and before use at the organization's premises, it should
be verified that all functional (operational) parameters and specifications, limits, and
tolerances detailed in the purchase specification and user manual/guide can be met to
achieve the required hygienic performance. A site-acceptance test (SAT) should be done
after the equipment components are installed and commissioned at the organization and
typically includes functional testing.
• The organization should conduct a validation study to confirm that newly installed
equipment functions as designed according to the manual/guide. This should include food
safety, quality, cleanability aspects, and cleaning validation activities. The validation, which
may have been initiated and planned prior to equipment being built, should be completed
as part of the process qualification, taking into consideration the planned or projected
usage in production.
Although it is separate from the FSSC 22000 additional requirement, it recommended that existing
equipment, which has not previously been evaluated in respect of their hygiene-related
performance, should undergo hygienic design risk assessments and a retrospective cleaning
validation based on historical data1. In this context, based on the risk assessment, the organization
should undertake a cleaning validation of the equipment if they have not done so already to
determine whether the cleaning is appropriate or whether changes to the cleaning program
should be made to ensure hygienic operation.
When implementing this requirement related to the management of equipment changes, clause
6.3 of ISO 22000:2018 has to be considered. Organizations should incorporate the risk-based
change management process for equipment into the change management process currently in
place as part of the FSMS. The change should be documented according to the existing process,
keeping note of the requirements of clause 6.3 for retained evidence.
An example of a documented change summary can include the indication of owner/ requester,
the due date or target date for installation and/ or commissioning, the required resources for
commissioning in terms of personnel, time, and capex, as well as the status (in progress or
complete). The team should hold a review meeting to facilitate the review of the change progress
until completed.
In accordance with 2.5.15 (b), possible effects on existing systems shall be assessed, and adequate
control measures determined and implemented.
The organization needs to assess the impact of the changes/modifications to equipment and
determine whether the change in equipment changes or increases the risk relating to existing
hazards identified in the hazard analysis or whether new hazards are introduced. If so, the
organization needs to evaluate the current control measures and amend them if needed, e.g.,
increase the frequency of monitoring, etc., or establish additional control measures.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 7 of 12
The organization should look to undertake the following (as applicable) if changes to equipment
are planned:
• Update the hazard analysis.
• Update the cleaning and sanitation program (procedures, cleaning schedules, records,
etc.). Establish whether outsourced services are required or whether cleaning and
sanitation can be done internally.
• Update the maintenance program (procedures, maintenance schedules, equipment
checks, etc.) and establish whether outsourced services are required or whether
maintenance and servicing can be done internally.
• Update production records, if necessary.
• Review and update the environmental monitoring program.
• Review and update the allergen management program, if applicable.
• Review and update the training program, and train relevant personnel on updated
procedures.
• Update any other relevant verification activities.
• Determine if additional resources are needed and whether they will be available should
breakdowns or faulty operations be experienced with the equipment.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 8 of 12
5.4 ADDITIONAL GUIDANCE
The below are steps to follow when implementing this additional requirement, based on the
EHEDG Whitepaper1 developed in conjunction with GFSI:
Element Guidance for implementation
Hygienic design
process
• Establish a multi-disciplinary team to assess the hygienic design and
risk assessment of new equipment. The team should be competent in:
o Food safety and quality, including microbiology and allergen
expertise.
o Hygienic design requirements and principles for equipment
and facilities
o Hygienic engineering/maintenance
o Product and process requirements and conditions
o Operational and functional considerations that could aﬀect
hygienic design (e.g., cleaning method, operating conditions,
possible future applications, etc.)
o Interpretation of technical engineering drawings and PI&D
o Legal requirements and industry standards
o Hazard analysis and risk assessment methods
o Cleaning & disinfection
• Evaluate the hygienic design and suitability of the equipment
throughout the life cycle of the equipment from the design concept
through construction, purchasing, and during use until the end of the
equipment's intended life.
In relation to the lifecycle evaluation of equipment, the EHEDG White Paper
provides further details on activities related to hygienic design, including
the design phase, installation and commissioning phase, and operational
use.
As part of the purchase speciﬁcation, the organization may require that the
supplier conﬁrms the equipment is in compliance with hygienic design
criteria and the suitability for cleaning by certiﬁcation according to
recognized standards (e.g., EHEDG-procedures) carried out by authorized
Certiﬁcation Bodies.
The supplier should also evaluate hygienic design based on the
requirements of ISO 14159 and/or EN 1672-2.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 9 of 12
Element Guidance for implementation
Risk assessment • Undertake a documented hygienic design risk assessment for food
safety hazards on new equipment. This risk assessment should
address the intended use, food safety hazard identification and
evaluation (risk assessment).
o A hygienic design risk assessment is specific to an application (e.g.,
product, process, procedures, location) and can be seen as
complementary to other existing risk assessments.
o Intended use is determined by the product and process
requirements, operating modes, cleaning processes, end users,
etc.
o Food safety hazards (biological, chemical, physical) and the
contamination mechanisms (ingress, accumulation, growth) that
should be considered and controlled during operational use.
o Evaluation (risk assessment) considers the severity or impact of the
food safety hazard and the likelihood or probability that the food
safety hazard occurs.
• Hygienic design principles are used to eliminate or mitigate the
hazards and reduce or eliminate the risks identified.
• Review the hygienic design risk assessment when a change to the
equipment, product or process is made, or other hazards arise.
Recommend to also review at a minimum frequency as defined by
applicable laws and regulations.
EHEDG has established a hygienic design risk management guideline that
can be used for new and existing equipment.
Intended use • Describe the intended use of the equipment, as a specification for the
intended purchase of the new equipment.
• The following should be taken into consideration when establishing
the intended use:
o Product
o Process
o Operating modes
o Cleaning
o Value chain
o Vulnerability of end users
o Machine users
o Life cycle
o Environment
o Laws and regulations
Refer to the EHEDG White Paper for further guidance on these elements to
be considered.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 10 of 12
Element Guidance for implementation
Hygienic design
principles
Hygienic design principles are the basic design aspects and methods used
to eliminate, reduce or mitigate biological, chemical and physical food
safety hazards, as well as negative inﬂuences on product quality. An
organization should adopt appropriate hygienic design principles such as:
• Equipment should be of a cleanable design, to meet all cleaning
objectives.
• Equipment should be designed and constructed to avoid favorable
growth conditions (for microorganisms, pests and their harborage),
appropriate to their intended use.
• Equipment should be designed to prevent contamination appropriate
to their intended use.
• Wherever relevant, recognized hygienic design standards/guidance
should be consulted for the design and construction of equipment,
appropriate for their intended use.
• Appropriate hygienic design principles should be adopted for the
installation of new equipment at sites handling food.
• Hygienic design principles should be adopted to ensure the
maintenance of the hygienic performance of the equipment,
appropriate for their intended use.
• Appropriate measures (with frequencies) should be speciﬁed,
undertaken accordingly and documented to mitigate any remaining
food safety risks identiﬁed in the hygienic design risk assessment
following equipment construction, purchase and installation.
The EHEDG White Paper1 provides further detail on these hygienic design
principles.
Legislation Establish whether there are any legal requirements for the hygienic design
of equipment, that the equipment needs to comply with in the country of
installation.
Purchasing and
supplier
performance
Establish, implement and maintain a procedure to ensure that the newly
purchased equipment will meet the hygienic design specification.
Change
Management
Undertake and document change control, to evaluate the impacts of any
changes/modiﬁcations on equipment hygienic design.
Product
contamination
risk and
segregation
Establish procedures to ensure that following purchasing and installation,
equipment is cleaned/commissioned by the organization before they are
used for the processing of food. Organizations should verify the efficiency
of the cleaning performed before starting any food production. Cleaning
needs to be recorded and verified.
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 11 of 12
Element Guidance for implementation
Training Establish, implement and maintain procedures to ensure:
• All employees and contractors involved in building and equipment
evaluation, speciﬁcation, purchase, maintenance and hygienic
design are trained in hygienic design principles appropriate to
their tasks and to the hygienic design requirements of the
equipment for its intended use.
• All employees and contractors involved in equipment installation,
undertaken at a site handling food are trained in food safety
principles appropriate to their task.
Transport Manufactured equipment should be stored and transported to the ﬁnal
customer in a manner that prevents contamination of the equipment
which may aﬀect food safety.
6. GUIDANCE FOR AUDITORS
The following is a non-exhaustive list of questions that an auditor can use to assess the FSSC
Additional Requirement 2.5.15:
• Are the purchase requirements established and known for all new equipment?
• Is there supporting documentation available for review, such as purchase specifications,
commissioning reports, equipment user manuals, certification documents, etc., to confirm
the hygienic design of the equipment and successful commissioning?
• Does it address the hygienic design of the equipment, the products handled, and the
legal/customer requirements?
• Has the intended use been clearly identified, and the risks related to the equipment
determined?
• Has a risk-based change-management process for new equipment or changes to existing
equipment been established?
• Have the relevant updates been made to the FSMS based on the changes made to
equipment? E.g., cleaning and maintenance schedules updated, environmental
monitoring program updated, evidence of training available?
Guidance Document: Equipment Management
FSSC 22000 Version 6 | September 2023 12 of 12
7. REFERENCES
1. EHEDG White Paper on GFSI Hygienic Design Scopes JI & JII October 2022. URL: EHEDG
2. ISO 22000:2018 - Food safety management systems — Requirements for any organization
in the food chain. URL: ISO 22000:2018 - Food safety management systems —
Requirements for any organization in the food chain
3. International Food Safety & Quality Network. URL: Food Safety with Hygienically
Constructed Equipment Built to Sanitary Design - IFSQN
4. GFSI Benchmarking Requirements (v2020.1). URL: GFSI
8. RELATED INDUSTRY INFORMATION
The references below are not an exhaustive list and are for information purposes only, and may
not apply to all organizations. The requirements of the Scheme shall be adhered to in all cases.
• EHEDG, The European Hygienic Engineering and Design Group. URL: EHEDG. Examples of
some of the guideline documents established by EHEDG include:
o Guideline Doc. 32:2005 Materials of construction for equipment in contact with
food
o Guideline Doc. 35:2006 Hygienic welding of stainless-steel tubing in the food
processing industry
o Guideline Doc. 44:2014 Hygienic Design Principles for Food Factories
o Guideline Doc. 8:2018 Hygienic Design Principles
o Guideline Doc. 50:2019 Hygienic Design Requirements for CIP Installations
o Guideline Doc. 55:2020 Hygienic Design Requirements for Bakery Equipment
• The European Committee for Standardization. URL: CEN-CENELEC
• FDA, The US Food and Drug Administration. URL: U.S. Food and Drug Administration
• NAMI, The North American Meat Institute. URL: North American Meat Institute
• The International Organization for Standardization (ISO), ISO 14159:2002. URL: ISO
14159:2002 - Safety of machinery — Hygiene requirements for the design of machinery
• BS EN 1672-2:2020. Food processing machinery. Basic concepts – Hygiene and cleanability
requirements. URL: BS EN 1672-2:2020
• Codex Alimentarius CXC 1-1969:2020. URL: CXC 1-1969 General Principles of Food Hygiene.
